Once around V838 Monoserotus.
So V838 is in the constellation
Monoseros the unicorn which is a rather
featureless region of sky in terms of
bright stars that lies between the
constellations of Orion Canis Major the
big dog and Canis minor the little dog.
Um I do struggle to be able to see a
unicorn there.
So V838 is an unremarkable star sitting
there just below visual magnitude at
magnitude 6.75.
Uh you can pick it up with optical
equipment and it looks like a faint red
star.
But in January of 2002,
this previously unrecognized star
suddenly brightened in uh power output
enormously. And it was given the
designation V838 Monoserotus
because it was the 838th
variable star to be recognized in that
constellation.
But we don't know what the original
cause for this flare up was. We have
seen a number of other similar events
now and I've created a class for these
called luminous red novi but that
doesn't really mean we understand
exactly what's going on.
So a nova, a new star where a star that
suddenly flares up, becomes visible for
a while and then usually fades away
again, uh was quite a mystery. But we
believe that most normal novi are caused
by hydrogen gas accumulating onto the
surface of the white dwarf uh that's
left over from the death of a giant
star. So if you have a binary system and
one of the stars dies and becomes a
white dwarf, it can then use its very
strong gravity to steal material away
from its larger neighbor. And that
hydrogen landing on the surface can
accumulate up to the point where a burst
of nuclear fusion ripples around the
surface of the star. The core of the
star is usually the degenerate core of
carbon and oxygen and uh the uh hydrogen
that accumulates could be triggered to
fuse to form helium and release a
tremendous burst of energy. Not enough
that it detonates the star completely.
Uh that will happen to a white dwarf if
you go too far. If you end up at more
than 1.44
solar masses, the so-called Chandra
Seikka limit. Uh but for more modest
white dwarfs you can get these nova
flashes of hydrogen fusion.
So it by February it had reached a
maximum brightness and began to fade
away again as was normal for nova and so
it was given the description nova
monoserotus 2002.
But then in March it started to
misbehave. It started brightening up
again especially in infrared light.
April, it did it again. Another uh
powerful uh increase in the amount of
light coming from it. And then in 2003
faded away all the way back down to its
original brightness of magnitude 15.6,
which is very faint indeed.
But
by 2003, what you could see was the red
colored dot of a red super giant. But
pre-eruption photographs that had been
uh unearthed showed a blue main sequence
star present in the images.
So somehow this ordinary blue main
sequence star had undergone this
enormous flare up and formed a red super
giant. And that we didn't really
understand.
When they measured the distance to V838,
they found it was 20,000 light years
away, right towards the outer reaches of
the galaxy, almost opposite the
direction of the galactic core. Um, and
that's interesting because stars are
relatively few and far between and
there's not a lot of dirt and dust and
gas uh out in those relatively clean
parts of the galaxy. So, something very
strange going on here.
When they measured the size of the star
in 2004, it came out at 1,200 solar
radi.
Now that's enormous. That's would
swallow the whole of the inner solar
system as shown in the diagram on the
right. And for it to have expanded from
a blue main sequence star perhaps uh a
few times the size of the sun all the
way up to 1,200 solar radi in just 2
years seemed incredible.
Um by 2014 it had shrunk again and was
now down to 750 times. Still much larger
than typical red super giants like
Antares.
And with that expansion, you get a
cooling effect. As things expand,
thermodynamics tells us that a gas will
cool down. And so we could rationalize
that with the extremely
red color of the star.
Actually taking it even redder than your
typical McLass red star. This was down
to the predominantly infrared radiating
LT type brown dwarf category and so it
became known as the first LT type super
giant. Um, and we've seen a few more of
those now. But this enormous radius,
this 1,200 solar radi gives you a very
large radiating surface area. And so
it's although it's a low temperature,
the huge size means the total energy
output is very high.
But when people looked back at the
detail of the light curve of the
eruption,
there was something very unusual.
There were three or more peaks in the
brightness shown in the blue dots here.
The brightness came up to a peak,
declined, peaked again, declined, peaked
again, and then decayed all the way back
down to magnitude 15.
So when it was at its brightest, it was
a million times as bright as the sun.
That's an immense power output. Really,
the uh great distance that was
discovered was a clue to just how bright
this object was. and it made it one of
the most luminous stars in the whole of
the Milky Way. And so this just didn't
seem to fit a simple nova eruption.
There were three peaks and the overall
brightness was far too great.
But photographs of the eruption shown
here in sequence from May 2002 through
September, October, December, and then
on into February 2004
show this deep red star in the center
and what looks like an expanding shell
of material, gas, and dust at a much
lower temperature surrounding it. Um, so
it does look like an explosion. And in
fact, we've got a lovely animation here
courtesy of European Space Agency of the
eruption. I just love this. I'll let
this run to the point where it finishes,
but it shows that appearance of this
expanding shell of gas
coming way out away from the star and
that deep red color of the star in the
center.
So that's a fantastic animation of the
uh all the single frames of the
photographs that were taken.
But it's not expanding. It's a light
echo.
The direct line of sight from the star
to us is the shortest path and the light
traveling that direct line arrives
first. So you see the bright flash from
the star and then what happens is that
the flash travels out in every direction
and then it hits various clouds of uh
material surrounding the star in layers
and you get the light reflecting from
those layers lighting those layers up
and then the light travels towards us.
Now the diagonal distance from the
layers is slightly longer but more
importantly the lights have to travel
sideways to get to them. And that longer
travel path length means a longer travel
time. And these are sufficiently widely
spaced layers that we're talking about a
light month or so in the additional path
length. And so the bright image of the
light illuminating the surrounding cloud
layers arrives as a series of echoes
where the light has bounced back one
after another after another after
another. And so what you're looking at
is not the material moving outwards, but
the light penetrating out through the
cloud and being reflected in turn off
different regions of it. because the
eruption was very much like a camera
flash going off. It wasn't a long pr
prolonged eruption. It was a short sharp
flash and that pulse of light travels
outwards, hits those layers and then
comes back to us. So this was a very
short-lived event in fact much shorter
than the light curve suggests.
So what was it? Well, one theory is that
it was actually a pair of stars merging,
perhaps two main sequence blue type
stars, B-class, merging together, or
perhaps a larger star, maybe an eight
solar mass main sequence star merging
with a smaller one, a sort of sub uh sun
mass 0.3 solar mass protoar or something
like that being absorbed. into it and
the collision was responsible for this
immense flash.
But it could be that it was the helium
flash, the sudden ignition of the core
of a the star. So typical stars
carry out nuclear fusion converting
hydrogen to helium in their core and
then when the helium builds up in the
core as an inert uh dead central region
the hydrogen is forced to be consumed
only in an overlying layer. The helium
is more dense and so sinks to the
center, creates this inert blob in the
middle. And that will continue to uh
burn like that, building a larger and
larger core, greater and greater
pressure on the core because of the high
density. And eventually
the situation can occur that the uh
conditions trigger at about 100 billion
degrees, a very high temperature, 10
times hotter than needed to fuse
hydrogen, the ignition of the helium
being converted by the triple alpha
process to carbon.
And this can result in a sudden ignition
of the core creating a huge burst of
output uh called a helium flash. And
that can often drive away the outer
layers of the star dissipating an awful
lot of the overlying unused hydrogen in
the process and can result in a very
bright but short-lived eruption. So
maybe it was a collision, maybe it was a
helium flash.
Another suggestion has been that it was
the consumption of a planet um one of
the children planets of this uh star
being swallowed up by it and perhaps a a
large Jupiterized planet spiraled into
the atmosphere of the star and as it
enters it will be slowed down by the
friction which will release large
amounts of the kinetic energy as heat up
the atmosphere and perhaps even
triggering ing off nuclear reactions
involving things like dutyium in the
outer layers of the star leading to a
very large pulse of heat
and in fact the subsequent second and
third peaks. The hypothesis goes that
maybe they were caused as the star
expanded due to this enormous heat. it
consumed
a second and a third giant planet and
that these spiraling into their doom
created those additional peaks. So,
there's a lot to learn here because we
really don't know what happened. Um, and
I think it's going to be quite difficult
to catch one of these very rare events
and really observe what is going on
rather than just seeing the aftermath.
So, it's likely that the original star
was a Btype main sequence star. Mass in
the range 5 to 10 solar masses,
temperature 20,000 Kelvin, perhaps five
times the sun's radius and about 4
million years old. Although there is
some doubt about this and some people
have suggested that it might have been
uh a super giant up to about 65 times
the mass of the sun. Uh but I think it's
most popularly believed that it's one of
these Btype stars and perhaps as we said
a pair of them merging um or a spot of
planetary cannibalism or just that
ignition of the helium flash. Now we
have seen a few others as I mentioned
earlier. There was an event in the
Andromeda galaxy in 1988 where a a star
erupted with a peak power of 750,000
times the sun's output and then dimmed
below detectability.
Um and then in 1994 there was another
eruption in the constellation of
Sagittarius. So V4332
much nearer by part of our galaxy and we
have the light curves for that although
they're somewhat sparse. The
observations could be better and maybe
they show multiple peaks maybe they
don't. It's a bit difficult to tell. Um
and we do have an image there of uh the
one in Sagittarius V4332
just as a uh uh red nova. So that's uh a
trip once around V838 Monoserotus. Um
and I'll leave you with this marvelous
photograph of the star burning away in
the center and the enormous amounts of
gas and dust around it. So thank you
very much for listening and I hope
you've enjoyed that one.